3Methodology
Learning interdependently between various human skeleton
joints is a tedious task. Human motion depends on the joint’s
relation, and human motion incorporates the motion of the
joints. This work aims to improve the networks’ prediction
ability to understand the interdependence between joints of
the human skeleton in the OoD scenario. We improve the
capability of our deep network by adding multiple linear
matrices, which helps to understand the interdependency
between joints by improving the capability of the latent
variable. Adding extra linear matrices between the encoder
and the decoder penalizes the rank of the latent variable
by reducing the number of dimensions used by the latent
variables. The more linear matrices added, the better the
regularization effect produced. The output of the encoder is
fed to the linear matrices, and its output is provided to the
decoder. This can result in an implicit regularization effect.
3.1 Problemdescription
In the literature on human motion, three-dimensional
joint coordinates and angles are the two most common
ways to represent a human position. These two methods
are completely static. In this work, we use joint angle
representation. As other methods discuss, The input of our
model is an observed continuous motion sequence X1:N =
[X1,X2,...Xi,..,XN] consisting N continuous observed
G. K. Yadav et al.
18030
pose frames, and the output of the model is T continuous
frames containing the predicted poses. Input and output
frames have a single scale. In other words, motion sequence
X1:N is a matrix consisting of N rows and K columns.
Each pose Xi ∈ RK has K joints to represent the pose.
Now the task is to build a model fpredict(.) to predict the
unknown future pose sequence ˆXN+1:N+T given X1:N that
approximates the ground truth XN+1:N+T. The column of
X1:N represents the human pose each time step, whereas
each row of X1:N shows the motion of each joint. Here
Xk
N =[Xk
1,Xk
2,.....Xk
N] shows the trajectory of the kth joint
across the N frames. In our study, N is set to 10, and T varies
from 2 to 25.
As stated in the literature, given a time horizon of
40ms, the short-term predictions correspond to 40, 80, 160,
320, and 400ms (2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 frames), while long
term predictions correspond to 1000ms (25 frames). In our
implementation, we set the number of input frames (NIF)
and the number of output frames (NOF) that determines the
type of prediction (short or long). With the CMU MoCap
dataset, our model has been trained to predict long-term
poses (25 frames). For short-term predictions, we set the
NOFofthetrainedmodelto2,4,6,8,or10framestomake
the short-term predictions 40, 80, 160, 320, or 400ms.
We use temporal encoding, bypassing the input frame to
a discrete cosine transform function. The goal of temporal
encoding is to capture each joint’s motion pattern. It
provides compact representation by discarding the high
frequencies that help capture the smoothness of human
motion. In the proposed model, we use a linear layer
enabled discriminative model, which is incorporated with a
generative model for training the network by minimizing the
combined loss calculated loss functions for both network
branches. In the testing phase, we use only the discriminator
network shown in Fig. 4 to predict the expected future pose
ˆ
XN+1:N+T.
Weapply discrete cosine transformations (DCT) on each
input to the network, along with the freedom to eliminate
low or high frequencies. Every single coefficient contains
information at a distinct temporal frequency of the whole
sequence. We define a vector xk =[xk,1,xk,2,..,..,xk,N],
which is a vector of a specific joint k, taken over N time
steps. This is converted to a DCT vector defined as Ck =
[Ck,1,Ck,2,.., ..,Ck,N], whereCk,l denotes the lth DCT
coefficient, which can be computed as (1):
Ck,l =
2
N
N
n=1
xk,n
√
1
1 +δl1 
cos( π
2N(2n−1)(l−1)). (1)
This is invertible on the condition that none of the
frequencies are cropped. Invertibility is achieved by
employing inverse discrete cosine transform (IDCT), which
can be expressed as (2):
xk,l =
2
N
N
l=1
Ck,l
√
1
1 +δl1 
cos( π
2N(2n−1)(l−1)). (2)
The IDCT is applied to the outputs for conversion to
the original coordinate system. This effectively allows
comparison with the ground truths.
3.2 Graphconvolutionalnetworks
The early version of neural networks works effectively
with Euclidean data. However, many datasets, such as
social networks, and biological, chemical, etc., are irregular,
non-Euclidean data. The graph uses a node to represent
these inconsistent data, and mathematical operations can
be implemented on these data types. All the mathematical
operations are applied to the GCN following the previous
CNN equation with some modification [36]. The forward
propagation of GCNs at each layer is represented by (3).
The term GCL(A[l−1]) represents the function of feature
representation. σ is the activation function. We presume
that C ∈ RK×(N+T) is elucidated on a graph with N+T
dimensions and k nodes. A[0] = C ∈ RK×(N+T),where
C is the feature matrix at the first layer, which can also be
written as A[0], it is also known as input features or node
features. W ∈ Rn[l−1]× n[l] are the weights and b ∈ Rn[l] are
the bias parameters. The count of hidden units in each layer
l is represented by n[l]. The normalized adjacency matrix S,
the weights W, and the biases b are all learnable parameters.
A[l−1] shows the feature representation matrix at layer l-1.
GCL(A[l−1]) = σ(SA[l−1]W +b). (
3)
To ensure that the model converges, we must normal
ize the features to avoid numerical instability and van
ishing/exploding gradients. S is the normalized adjacency
matrix calculated using (4).
S =D−1
2 ∗s ∗D−1
2. (
4)
Moreover, S ∈ RK×K is a normalized graph Laplacian
that constitutes the connection between the different joints
and is layer specific. In contrast, s is the adjacency matrix
representing the edges or connection between the nodes in
the forward propagation. Moreover, D is the diagonal node
degree matrix, which normalizes the adjacency matrix s.
3.3 Residual graphconvolutional networkblock
The residual graph convolutional network (ResGCN)
consists of graph convolutional layers with residual
connections. By doing this, we are trying to enhance the
capability of simple GCN. The graphical representation
Implicit regularization of a deep augmented...
18031
of the ResGCN is in Fig. 1. First, we use this ResGCN
in the encoder of our network, and one after another,
we use six ResGCNs in the encoder network. Similarly,
we use six ResGCNs for both branches of the decoder
network, followed by a single graph convolutional layer.
Each ResGCN works as follows:
ResGCN(A)= A+S(SAW)W,
(5)
where A ∈ RK×N is the activation of the previous layer
passing to the ResGCN block. S ∈ RK×K is a normalized
adjacency matrix, and W ∈ RN×N is a weight matrix. The
output of this block passes through a nonlinear activation
function. We employ the ReLU activation function in our
scenario. ReLU function production is the result of the
ResGCNblock. Weusesixsuch blocks for both the encoder
and decoder.
3.4 Implicit regularization using linear matrices
We use generative and discriminative models to learn the
OoD scenario. Earlier research works [16, 18, 35] used
a discriminative model for the human motion prediction
task, and they discussed only the ID scenario. For the first
time, [11] proposed augmentation of the generative model
with a discriminative model to deal with the OoD scenario.
Bourached et al. [11] uses the variational autoencoder as a
generative model to deal with the OoD cases. Decreasing or
restricting the latent representation’s information capacity
is a crucial part of autoencoder approaches. Jing et al. [13]
proposed an approach to minimize the rank of latent
variables by adding linear matrices between the encoder
and decoder of the autoencoder. To obtain motivation, we
use this concept in our case, where our task to predict
the future poses an OoD scenario. In our model, we
use an autoencoder branch together with a discriminative
branch. By adding the linear matrices, we improve the
learning representation capability of the latent variable of
the generative branch.
Implicit regularization is a phenomenon whereby gra
dient descent optimization of a linear multilayer neural
network results in a low-rank solution. Our goal is to cre
ate an architecture that benefits from this phenomenon to
enhance the quality of learned representations in predicting
human motion. Learning good representations between var
ious human joints remains a core issue in human motion
prediction tasks. To address this scenario in the proposed
deep network architecture, we add extra linear matrices
W1, W2,.,Wj..Wl between the encoder and decoder net
works. We used eight linear matrices. The dimensions of
each matrix are Wj ∈ Rd×d, and they are initialized ran
domly. We train all Wj matrices jointly with both branches.
Figure 2 shows the encoder part of our network. Lin
ear matrices are added after residual GCN blocks. These
matrices successfully minimize the rank of the covariance
matrix of the latent space while training latent variables by
encouraging them to use lower dimensions. Moreover, by
accomplishing this, they intensify the regularization effect
of our deep network. The regularized network learns inter
dependently between the various joints of the 3D skeleton of
a human, and this capability of the network helps to predict
more accurate motion during inference.
The inference network used for testing purpose only
is shown in Fig. 4. The predicted pose is the output
of the decoder network with a residual connection and
is represented by the following equation. Equation (6)
mathematically expresses the Fig. 4.
ˆ
Ck,n = Dec(Wl....W2W1Enc(Ck,n)) + Ck,n. (
6)
Because linear matrix multiplication is associative, all
Wj matrices can be absorbed into the encoder during
inference. As a result, this linearly adjusted decoder can be
used directly to generate the future pose.
3.5 Networkarchitecture
Figure 3 shows the details of the train network architecture
of our network. There exists one GCL at the start of
the network. This GCL is followed by the first 6 Graph
Convolution Blocks (GCBs). Each GCB consists of two
graph convolution layers with residual connections. For
each layer l, the number of hidden units, n[l] = 256. The
first 6 GCBs and linear layers constitute the encoder part of
Fig. 2 Figure shows the encoder part of our deep augmented network
Fig. 1 Complete figure of residual graph convolutional network block
G. K. Yadav et al.
18032
Fig. 3 The proposed deep network architecture consists of GCN,
linear matrices, and a variational autoencoder branch.Ck,n is
the input DCT coefficient matrix. ˆCk,l is the DCT coeffi
cient predicted by the discriminative decoder branch. Ck,l is
the DCT coefficient of the ground truth corresponding to the
output. Ld() is the loss function for discriminative branch.
LG() is the loss function calculated by the VAE branch. This
architecture encoder consists of one graph convolutional layer
(GCL), six residual graph convolutional network (ResGCN) blocks,
our network architecture. These blocks are defined with a
latent variable. The latent variable can be represented as (7):
z ∈ Rk×nz = N(μz,σz),
(7)
where μz ∈ Rk×nz, σz ∈ Rk×nz. nz is 8 or 32 according
to the stability of the training process. Equation (8) defines
the KL divergence between a latent space distribution and
the spherical Gaussian N(0, I) distribution.
ll = KL(q(z|c) q(z))= 1
2 
nz
1 
(μz2 + σz2 −1−log(σz2).
(8)
The output of these six GCBs is passed through the linear
layers. The number of linear layers is set as 8. The linear
layers perform the task of applying a linear transformation
of whatever input goes into them. The learnable weights of
these layers are of the shape (outfeatures,infeatures) and
are taken from a uniform distribution μ(−√k,√k),where
k = 1
in2
features
,
where infeatures is the size of each input sample, and
outfeatures is the size of each output sample. The linear
transformation applied to the incoming data is y = wT ∗
x. Our network’s encoder design is depicted in Fig. 2.
and eight linear matrices. For training, the network consists of two
branches. The first discriminative branch consists of six ResGCN
blocks followed by GCL and a residual connection. Second, the varia
tional autoencoder (VAE) branch uses two GCL layers to make a code
variable. The code variable passes through a GCL followed by six Res
GCNblocks and two GCL blocks separately to construct μk,l and σkl.
Then using the loss function discussed in the methodology section,
we calculate the loss for training. We use the combined loss l for the
training process
The output of the linear transformations is fed to the
decoder part of the VAE that has the same composition
as the discriminative branch. It has 6 GCBs. The output
neurons are parameterized as μz ∈ RK×(N+T), and
log(σ2) ∈ RK×(N+T). The second component of VAE
has a negative variational lower bound (VLB) as shown
in (9). It reconstructs the inputs as samples from a maximum
likelihood Gaussian distribution.
lc = log(p(c|z)) =−1
2 
N+T
n=1
l
l=1
(log(σ2
kl)
),
+log(2π)+ |ck,l − μk,l|2
elog(σ2
k,l )
where ck,l are the ground truth DCT coefficients.
3.6 Training
(9)
The complete network is trained in conjunction with the
negative VLB. Our loss function is defined by (10).
N+T
l =
1
K(N+T)
n=1
K
k=1
|ˆxk,n − xk,n|−λ(lc − ll).
(10)
In each layer, the graph size shows that the count of the
parameters differs with K, which is the number of joints.
Implicit regularization of a deep augmented...
18033
Fig. 4 Overview of the linear transformation incorporated discrimi
nator network to predict frame xN+1 to xN+T by taking x1 to xN.
Each frame passes through the DCT function. Here, K represents the
number of joints in the 3D human skeleton. N shows the number of
The values of K are 48 for H3.6 M, 64 for CMU joint
angles, and K = 65 for CMU Cartesian coordinates. λ is a
hyperparameter, and our entire model has approximately 4.2
Mparameters.
The average l1 distance between the ground-truth joint
angles and the projected joint angles is given the joint angle
loss, which can be defined as (11):
N+T
la =
1
K(N+T)
n=1
K
k=1
|ˆxk,n − xk,n|,
(11)
where ˆxk,n is the predicted kth joint, and xk,n is the
analogous ground truth, both at time-step n. As has already
been proposed by [34] and implemented in [12, 19], the
mean per joint position error (MPJPE) has been used for the
training of joint angle loss on 3D joint coordinate prediction.
For each training sample, the MPJPE has been established
as (12):
N+T
lm =
1
K(N+T)
n=1
K
k=1
| ˆ
Pk,n − Pk,n|2,
(12)
where K is the count of the skeletal joints, ˆPk,n ∈ R3 is
the predicted kth joint position, and Pk,n is the analogous
ground truth, both at time-step n.
Out of these different loss functions, our final loss
function to train our network architecture is represented as
l. l integrates the loss of both branches of the network. la
shows the loss of the discriminator branch, where lc and ll
are losses of the VAE branch. We use lm (MPJPE) for test
cases to compare our results with the other approach results
(Fig. 4). We also compare our results in the Euclidean
distance between anticipated and ground truth joint angles.